
--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Table of Contents
Letter from Cascadia Innovation Corridor Co-Chairs .................................................. 3
Acknowledgements .............................................................................................. 4
Executive Summary .............................................................................................. 5
Definitions ........................................................................................................... 8
The Growing Crisis: A Widening Housing Supply Gap ................................................ 9
A Roadmap to Build 3 Million Housing Units ............................................................ 12
⊲ Land ............................................................................................................. 13
⊲ Economics ..................................................................................................... 17
⊲ Permitting ..................................................................................................... 20
⊲
Innovation .....................................................................................................24
Foundational Elements for Success ........................................................................27
⊲
The Necessity of Public-Private Partnership .......................................................27
⊲
Tracking Progress and Creating Accountability ...................................................27
Build, Baby, Build: Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia .............................. 29
Call to Action...................................................................................................... 33
Sources ............................................................................................................. 34
2
--- PAGE 3 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Letter from Cascadia Innovation
Corridor Co-Chairs
T he Cascadia Innovation Corridor is built on the belief that British Columbia, Oregon, and Washington
can work together to create one of the most dynamic, inclusive, and sustainable mega-regions in the
world. At the heart of this vision is a simple truth: everyone deserves access to safe, affordable housing. But
our housing crisis has reached a breaking point. Home prices and rents have skyrocketed 2-4 times faster than
incomes since 2019, and British Columbia, Oregon, and Washington now have some of the tightest housing
markets in North America. We simply don’t have enough housing. The time for bold thinking, bold action, and
bold execution is now—before it’s too late.
We are proud to introduce “Build, Baby, Build: Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia,” a comprehensive
set of policies designed to tackle this challenge head-on. While good strides have been made across all three
jurisdictions, particularly in addressing homelessness and investing in affordable housing, we need to double
down on workforce housing. The housing shortage is a complex issue, and there is no single solution. However,
forward-looking policy and actions along with a public-private partnership can solve this crisis and ensure that
Cascadia remains a place where everyone can thrive. Smart investments in workforce housing today will build
the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That tomorrow is coming fast—by 2050, an additional 3-4 million
people will call Cascadia home. The time to act is now.
This report builds on progress in housing for those who are homeless and low-income. It outlines the actions
we must take to address the growing crisis of workforce housing. To meet the housing demand of the next
20 years, Cascadia needs to build approximately 3 million new housing units, but we are on track to miss that
target by about 1 million units. Addressing this gap will require a significant ramp-up in housing production,
far exceeding historical rates. Achieving this ambitious goal will require public-private partnership and a
combination of strategies: expanding zoning for higher-density development along underutilized commercial
corridors, streamlining permitting and other local processes to cut through red tape, and ensuring that financing
is available to make housing projects viable.
O ur ultimate recommendation is comprehensive action to address the need for land, financing, and
efficient and effective government permitting, along with a culture of openness to new ideas in
technology and housing construction. California has taken such an approach and, if we work together, we
have the potential of building up to 1.4 million new housing units in Cascadia.
This challenge is immense, but we have the power to confront it head-on. Public sector leaders must take bold,
transformative action to create a landscape that truly supports increased housing production. But this isn’t just a
government issue—it demands a united effort from all of us. Governments, businesses, and residents must rally
together with an unwavering commitment to tackle this crisis with the urgency and determination it demands.
The future of our communities depends on it, and the very qualities that make Cascadia an attractive place to
live and work are at risk.
We urge you to join us in this essential effort. Thank you to those who have been doing this hard work already.
The future of Cascadia hangs in the balance, and the choices we make today will determine whether our
region thrives or falters. Together, we have the power to ensure Cascadia remains a place where everyone
can prosper.
Gov. Chris Gregoire Laura Jones
Co-Chair, Cascadia Innovation Corridor Co-Chair, Cascadia Innovation Corridor
CEO, Challenge Seattle CEO, Business Council of British Columbia
3
--- PAGE 4 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Acknowledgements
W e thank the team at Boston Consulting Group (BCG), whose rigorous approach and dedication to solving
our community’s most intractable challenges was instrumental to the success of this project. We also
want to thank our Cascadia housing roadmap advisory group, who provided invaluable input and guidance
throughout this process. Comprised of outstanding regional leaders, they dedicated their time and insights
to this report, and we are grateful to each of them for their commitment to ensuring safe, affordable housing
is accessible to everyone in Cascadia. We thank the team at HDR that put together thoughtful, data-driven
analysis on the commercial corridor rezoning opportunity in Cascadia, and whose findings form the foundation
for the comprehensive recommendation in this report. Finally, we express our thanks to the many other experts
consulted by BCG, who lent their time and expertise to this project.
Andrea Bell Jane Broom
Executive Director Senior Director
Oregon Housing and Community Services Microsoft Philanthropies
Andrew Colas Jill Atkey
CEO CEO
Colas Construction BC Nonprofit Housing Association
Armin Amrolia Lorelei Juntunen / Ian Carlton
Deputy City Manager President & CEO / Senior Economic Advisor
City of Vancouver EcoNorthwest
Brandon Morgan Mark Riker
Director, Residential Development Executive Secretary
Vulcan WA State Building & Construction Trades
Council
Damien Hall
Partner Michael Fong / Anne Fritzel
Dunn Carney LLP Director / Housing Programs Manager
Washington State Department of Commerce
Denny Heck
Lieutenant Governor Nick Federici
Washington State Government Relations Consultant
Nick Federici Government Relations
Eric Engstrom
Director Steve Walker
City of Portland Bureau of Planning and Executive Director
Sustainability Washington State Housing Finance Commission
Gregg Colburn
Professor
University of Washington
4
--- PAGE 5 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Executive Summary
A cross our region individuals and families
feel the impacts of our housing crisis every
day. When affordable housing is out of reach, it
affects everything: traffic worsens, families have
less money to spend on groceries and childcare,
and communities become less inclusive and more
fragmented. Adequate housing is critical to the
vibrancy of local economies and communities. It’s not
just about providing shelter—it’s about ensuring that
families can put down roots, teachers, nurses, and
first responders can live near those they serve, and
businesses can attract and retain the talent they need
to grow. Without timely action to build more housing,
economic inequality will deepen, and our region’s ⊲ The share of housing stock affordable to
competitiveness will erode. households earning less than 120% Area
Median Income (AMI) in Washington and
This crisis extends across the entire Cascadia region.
Oregon has decreased from 80%-85% in 2019
This roadmap builds on two previous reports by
to 45% in 2024.
Challenge Seattle—”The Invisible Crisis: A Call to
Action on Middle-Income Housing Affordability” (2019) Over the last several decades, housing production
and “The Conspicuous Crisis: Addressing Housing has been cyclical, with a major building boom
Affordability in Washington” (2022)—and provides preceding the Great Recession and a huge slowdown
fresh insights into the worsening housing crisis. It also in the years following 2007. Today’s estimates indicate
offers tactical guidance to boost workforce housing that Cascadia currently faces a deficit of at least
supply over the next two decades. Government 250,000 housing units.
efforts to end homelessness and expand low-income
Now, just as building started to approach pre-
housing are vital and must continue. Now is the time
recession levels, permits requested in 2023 and the
to build on this strong foundation and address the
first half of 2024 suggest that we may see production
housing crisis affecting the majority of Cascadians.
falling once again. Estimating average production
This is the moment to commit to strong public-private
across the last 20 years smooths these highs and lows
partnerships and unleash the private sector to tackle
to allow us to realistically understand what is likely to
the housing crisis for middle-income families. The
be built and the future gap. Simply put: We need to
longer we delay bold action, the more precarious
build 130,000 units annually across Cascadia to meet
economic and housing security becomes.
demand, but we are currently only building 85,000
The Growing Crisis: every year, and even this is not a guarantee. Status
quo production—with annual fluctuations in housing
A Widening Housing Supply Gap
starts and completions due to market conditions and
Despite heavy emphasis from policymakers and other factors—will produce roughly 2 million housing
billions of dollars of public and private investment, the units over the next 20 years, but our region needs 3
lack of affordable housing has worsened dramatically million to house everyone2, creating a deficit of about
over the last five years. By all accounts, our affordable 1 million homes by 2044.
housing crunch has deteriorated further over the last
Cascadia’s current shortage and the widening gap
several years:
in available units will have dramatic impacts for
⊲ Vancouver, BC leads Canadian cities for highest
individuals, families, and our economy. And this
average two-bedroom rental price, with the
shortfall persists and will continue to grow despite
lowest vacancy rates.1
historic efforts by policymakers to build low-
⊲ Washington and Oregon have the two tightest income housing, support missing middle and infill
housing markets in the U.S. in terms of housing development, address homelessness, and ease
availability. affordability concerns for Cascadia residents.
5
--- PAGE 6 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Executive Summary (cont’d)
Why are we underbuilding now? The path forward includes these key recommendations
to increase production to fill our housing gap:
Three factors drive the root causes of our production
challenges:
⊲ Land—Unlock developable land through zoning
1. The cost of an average multifamily development reform: Sweeping zoning reforms, particularly
has skyrocketed by 36% since 2019, which means by rezoning commercial corridors for mixed-use
only luxury units “pencil” for developers, financing development—a move that could unlock capacity
for workforce developments is difficult to compile, for 5 million new housing units, with 1.4 million
and investments for affordable housing don’t go as new units considered developable by 2044.
far. We cannot scale to meet the crisis by building California’s recent bipartisan effort to rezone
multifamily homes at $525,000 a unit when they commercial corridors, strip retail, and big-box sites
need to be built at a cost below $370,000 to be paved the way for 1.6 to 2.4 million new housing
affordable to 80% AMI household. units. Additional efforts, including transit-oriented
development and building on underutilized
2. Restrictive and outdated zoning limits access
government and religious properties, can unlock
to developable land. Scarcity drives higher land
tens of thousands of additional units
costs, which typically make up 10% of the cost of
development. ⊲ Economics—Deploy low-cost capital and
incentivize workforce housing development: In
3. State and local policies and permitting processes
recent years, there have been new, innovative
create additional timing uncertainty, risk, and costs.
financing models developed through public-private
Statewide in Washington, the average permit delay
collaboration. We recommend building on this
adds an additional 6.5 months to a project, with
work to address the financing constraints that
delays of 17-18 months in some jurisdictions.
hinder development by deploying low-cost capital,
Roadmap to Build 3 Million including leveraging local governments’ bonding
capacity and providing time-limited tax exemptions
Housing Units
to workforce housing projects. These programs—
Building 3 million homes over the next 20 years which reduce development costs, fill funding gaps,
will cost at least $1.5 trillion—far more than the and help simplify developers’ capital stacks—could
government or private sector alone can handle. unlock 65,000 units that are affordable to an 80%
Solving this crisis demands an unprecedented public- AMI household over 20 years.
private partnership and aggressive policy changes to
⊲ Permitting—Remove barriers to development,
address land, economics, and permitting challenges.
including timely, standardized permitting across
To meet our housing goals, we need a culture of land use and building permits: Prioritization
of affordable and workforce housing, including
partnership that fosters strong collaboration between
ministerial review, and the use of preapproved plans
government and the private sector. This will require
for multifamily development could contribute to the
breaking through any historical distrust to establish
creation of roughly 120,000 units over the next two
the regulatory conditions necessary to unleash
decades. One Vancouver developer estimated that
development of workforce housing, recognizing
he could sell duplex units for $100,000 less if six
that we all share the goal of increasing housing
months were shaved off the permitting process.3
affordability and access for the Cascadia residents of
today and tomorrow. ⊲ Innovation—Adopt supportive strategies, including
technology solutions and innovative construction
Success also hinges on robust tracking and
methods, to improve process efficiency and bring
accountability mechanisms at the state and provincial
down development costs: Additional strategies,
level to ensure local jurisdictions are meeting their
such as implementing technology solutions across
housing targets. This includes detailed, transparent
the development lifecycle and adopting modular
progress reporting, with regular assessments of
and offsite construction methods, offer further
housing production relative to established goals.
opportunities to add tens of thousands of units.
6
--- PAGE 7 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Executive Summary (cont’d)
Build, Baby, Build: Unlocking
1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Cascadia’s housing crisis cannot be solved with
piecemeal efforts or incremental changes. We
need a comprehensive, all-in approach that tackles
every aspect of the problem simultaneously—
anything less will fall short. Our best opportunity
to close our widening housing supply gap is to act
comprehensively, addressing land, economics,
and permitting in a coordinated, self-reinforcing
way. Such action creates the potential to redevelop
underutilized commercial properties for 1.4 million
new housing units over the next 20 years, which
provides a needed buffer to meet our 1-million unit
gap. 1.4 million new units represent high-potential
parcels for redevelopment, but not every parcel
may be viable for redevelopment due to the market
conditions, ownership, or economic viability.
To unlock this potential, we recommend a
comprehensive, statewide or provincial approach
that includes:
⊲ LAND
Rezoning underutilized or vacant commercial
areas such as parking lots, office parks, strip
malls, and big box retail, which are best prepared
to absorb density and typically have good transit
connectivity.
⊲ ECONOMICS
Lowering the cost of housing using creative
financing mechanisms like bonds and incentives
such as the reduction of parking minimums and C ascadia has the unique opportunity to integrate
time-limited tax exemptions. these solutions and build on innovative policies
implemented elsewhere, such as commercial corridor
⊲ PERMITTING
rezoning undertaken in California. By upzoning
Prioritizing affordable and workforce housing
undervalued strip commercial lands, mixed-income
development and creating a fast-track permitting
housing would be integrated in locations close to
process for projects that meet affordability criteria,
existing services and jobs, away from climate hazard
such as by exempting projects from certain
zones, and along transit-rich corridors.
discretionary review processes, creating a by-
right or ministerial review process, or developing This requires a united public-private partnership,
a catalog of preapproved plans that can be bold action from every level of government, and
automatically approved. collaboration across sectors. The stakes couldn’t be
⊲ INNOVATION higher, and the urgency for action is critical.
Supporting innovation and adoption of technology Only by working together and implementing these
solutions and novel construction methods and solutions as a cohesive strategy can we close the
materials, which create opportunities to lower costs housing supply gap and secure Cascadia’s future
and increase timeliness of development projects. growth and prosperity.
7
--- PAGE 8 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Definitions
Affordable Housing: Affordable housing is generally defined as housing on which the occupant is paying no
more than 30% of gross income for housing costs, including utilities.
Area Median Income (AMI): The midpoint of a region’s income distribution. Half of the households in an area
earn more than the AMI, and half earn less. AMI in Cascadia ranges from $72,000 USD in British Columbia to
$77,000 USD in Oregon to $90,000 USD in Washington in 2022.
Housing Cost: Monthly costs of housing for a household, which includes rent and utilities for renter households,
and mortgage, insurance, taxes, and utilities for owner households.
Housing Unit: A residential space used as a dwelling by one or more individuals and used synonymously
with the word “home.” It encompasses a variety of residential structures including apartments, condominiums,
single-family homes, accessory dwelling units (ADUs), and other similar forms of housing.
Housing Cost-Burdened: A household that spends more than 30% of gross monthly income on housing costs.
Workforce Housing: For purposes the report, we define workforce housing as housing for moderate-income
households making between 60%-120% AMI. These households often earn too much to qualify for traditional
affordable housing subsidies. Some other sources may refer to housing for households in these income bands as
“middle-income housing.” Housing includes ownership and rental opportunities and a variety of housing types.
Scope of this Report
While supporting the production of all housing is critical, this report has a particular focus on the 60-120%
AMI bracket, which this report defines as “workforce housing.” In the current market environment, developing
housing for below 60% AMI typically requires subsidies. Roughly 30-35% of households in Cascadia fall within
the 60-120% AMI income brackets, yet there have been more limited mechanisms and programs to support
housing development affordable for these income levels.
Profiles: Retail Construction School Dental Computer
Cashier Worker Teacher Hygienist Systems
Analyst
The scope of this She manages a As a fourth- A second-grade She works at a
report covers department store year electrician teacher, in his clinic in Surrey, He works at a
middle-income in downtown apprentice who third year of has a Diploma in tech company
households that
Vancouver and grew up near teaching in Dental Hygiene, in Bellevue,
are essential to
is a part-time Seattle, she Portland Public and lives in a has a degree
the fabric of our
Management is hoping to Schools, he studio apartment in Computer
society
student living move out of her enjoys hiking on walking distance Science, and lives
with two parents’ house to the weekends from her office. in Redmond.
roommates. have more space and is an avid
for her dog. reader.
Estimated
Household Income ~$45,000 ~$60,000 ~$64,000 ~$78,000 ~$110,000
(USD)
As a % of
median household ~60% ~70% ~80% ~100% ~120%
income
8
--- PAGE 9 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Growing Crisis:
A Widening Housing Supply Gap
F acing record home prices and some of out of major metro areas and are moving further away.
the highest rents in our countries, housing In Portland, just one in five residents can afford to
affordability continues to be the top concern facing buy a home in the area, forcing decisions between
our region. Even as policymakers pursue myriad home ownership and manageable commute times.5
solutions to address the crisis, housing costs have In Washington, a minimum wage worker would need
continued to skyrocket, with the problem exacerbating to work 99 hours per week to afford a two-bedroom
an already challenging situation. Rent and home rental property; in Oregon, he or she would need
prices have increased at a higher rate compared to to work 88 hours per week.6 We cannot expect our
incomes since 2019 across Cascadia, and between neighbors to continue making these quality-of-life
a third and half of households are housing cost tradeoffs if we aspire to remain a desirable place to
burdened across the three jurisdictions.4 At the same live and a globally competitive mega-region.
time, changing demographics, such as later marriages
But why is affordability continuing to plummet and
and smaller family sizes, are reshaping housing
forcing families to make these tradeoffs? To put it
demand with a growing need for multifamily housing
plainly: We simply do not have enough housing units,
options that are accessible and affordable. As more
and in recent years, it has become too expensive for
people seek smaller, centrally located homes that
developers to build more. Our affordability crisis is
align with evolving lifestyle and financial priorities,
due to an undersupply of housing units, and this gap
demand has surged for urban multifamily housing
is only set to widen over the coming two decades. As
designed to meet these needs affordably.
our economy and population have grown, our limited
In today’s housing-constricted environment, housing supply has been stretched thin, and new
worsening affordability is forcing people to pay production cannot keep up with growing demand. In
more and make difficult sacrifices, with many making 2022, Washington and Oregon had the two tightest
do with less space or making tradeoffs between housing markets in the country when comparing the
critical household expenses, such as gas, groceries, ratio of housing units to households.
childcare, and paying off other debt. Some are priced
“It’s never been as expensive to own a
home anywhere, anytime in Canada
as it was in Vancouver in the fourth
quarter [of 2023]. At a staggering
106.4%, the share of a median income
needed to cover ownership costs
means that only a select few high-
income earners can afford to buy.”
Royal Bank of Canada Report
9
--- PAGE 10 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Growing Crisis (cont’d)
To Meet Housing Needs, Cascadia Needs to Increase Baseline Production by Estimated x1.5-2
WA housing needs and gap OR housing needs and gap BC housing needs and gap
(approximate units per year) (approximate units per year) (approximate units per year)
15-20k
10k or 10-15k
or 60%
70% or 40%
GAP 50- GAP ~25k GAP 45-
-2k
-3k TO 55k TO TO 50k
-2k
MEET MEET 35- Loss MEET
4 3 0 5 k - f L r o o s m s 35k NEEDS 15- f L r o o s m s 15k NEEDS 37k dem fr o o l m iti on 35k NEEDS
demolition 20k
demolition
Base Base Housing Base Base Housing Base Base Housing
Production Production needs Production Production needs Production Production needs
Including 2024 Including 2024 Including 2024
Demolition Demolition Demolition
Understanding Our scarcity of affordable, developable land to local
permitting processes that create delay, risk, and
Housing Supply Crisis
added costs for developers.
To fill our existing housing gap of 250,000 units
across Cascadia, accommodate 3-4 million new The High Cost of Every Unit of Housing
residents over the next 20 years, and replace units
Cascadia is facing some of the highest per unit costs
lost to demolition, we need to build approximately
of development, and since 2019, the cost per unit for
130,000 homes every year. Yet we are building just
a typical multifamily development has grown from
85,000, a number averaged across the last two
approximately $385,000 to $525,0007—or 36%.
decades to account for the cyclical nature of the
housing production industry. It is simply not enough. In places like Arizona, Michigan, or Virginia, the
We need to build over 50% more housing units than cost of housing is significantly lower. Nationally, the
we are currently building every year across Cascadia. cost per unit of housing in a multifamily building is
closer to $232,000-$280,000.8 These differences
Without action, every year, we are falling further
in development costs have a direct impact on
behind and the crisis worsens. By 2044, we need
households’ ability to rent or buy a unit. Nationwide,
roughly 3 million additional housing units, yet we
for each $1,000 added to the cost of constructing a
are likely to only build 2 million, leaving a gap of
home, it’s estimated that 465 households are priced-
approximately 1 million homes.
out of their ability to purchase a home.9
Our current undersupply problem has been years
in the making. Housing production plummeted in
the wake of the Great Recession. Building slowly
increased over the next decade, but it only began The major costs of building housing include:
to reach pre-Great Recession levels when it was
• Land acquisition and holding
once again slowed by the COVID-19 pandemic
and its impacts. Rising material costs, supply chain • Construction, primarily comprised of
issues, labor shortages, and economic uncertainty materials and labor and the cost of
suppressed new construction. Coming out of the constructing parking
pandemic, inflation further exacerbated material • Financing (e.g., interest, fees)
and labor cost challenges, and rising interest rates
• Regulatory costs (e.g., permitting fees,
increased the cost of financing for developers.
impact fees, cost of delays)
At the same time, we have failed to address some of • Other soft costs, including professional
the underlying cost drivers that make development services, sales tax, and developer overhead
so costly, from outdated land use policy that creates
10
--- PAGE 11 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Growing Crisis (cont’d)
Development costs have grown 36% since 2019, which
means developers are now producing units that are 1.5-2x There are three main issues to address
the affordable level for 80% AMI households. to bring down development costs and
increase supply:
Affordable level for 80% AMI HH
~36% jump Land: Limited developable metro
land and NIMBYism hinder multi-
~$525k
family housing projects
~1.5-2x
~$430k higher
~$386k Economics: Banks are less
willing to lend or are lending at
~$370k
~$350k
+2pts higher rates (2022-24)
Permitting: Cascadia’s
permitting process can take 1-5
years vs. ~1 year in other regions
2019 2022 2024
Estimated total development cost per unit from 2019 to 2024
H ow can we meaningfully bring down the cost of ⊲ On her first full day in office, Oregon Gov. Tina
development to encourage more production? Kotek signed Executive Order 23-04, which set
The key is to bring costs down to a point that we an ambitious housing production goal of 36,000
can unleash the private sector on development homes per year and established an expert Housing
of housing for 60-120% AMI without heavy public Production Advisory Council to develop an action
subsidy. Developers have expressed that they are plan to meet the state’s targets.
eager to build more housing if they can make the
economics work, but that they feel that policymakers ⊲ In Washington, the 2023 legislative session was
dubbed the “Year of Housing,” with notable bills
often take an adversarial position, viewing them as
including House Bill 1110 (2023), which requires
part of the problem rather than the solution. This lack
cities of certain sizes to allow for “middle housing”
of a collaborative approach, as well as regulations
(i.e., multiple dwelling units per lot), and House
that add time and cost and uncertainty in how future
Bill 1337 (2023), which legalized two ADUs per lot
policy changes will impact development economics,
while removing local regulatory barriers. Other
will need to be addressed to see a meaningful uptick
bills, passed in 2023 and 2024, require clear
in new housing starts.10
and objective standards for local design review,
Progress So Far but More to be Done introduced reforms to condominium liability law,
and provided builders with great flexibility in local
Across Cascadia, state, provincial, and local
parking compliance, among other things.
governments have recognized the housing crisis and
acted to increase supply. These efforts have led to Even with these actions, however, a large production
meaningful change in state and provincial laws to gap remains in all three jurisdictions. To build more
encourage the production of additional housing and housing, we must make more land available, bring
provide a strong foundation for future action: down the cost of development, and remove barriers
that prevent developers from building more housing
⊲ In February 2024, the British Columbia’s provincial
in our cities and towns. Importantly, these policy shifts
government announced the BC Builds program,
must translate into tangible, on-the-ground results—
an initiative delivered through BC Housing that
ensuring that new housing is constructed swiftly
leverages government, community, and non-profit
and efficiently to meet the growing demand, rather
owned and under-used land to speed up the
than being delayed by the lack of full and timely
delivery and affordability of housing. The program is
implementation.
funded by a $950 million CAD investment from the
Province, a $2 billion CAD provincial fund for low-
cost financing, and $2 billion CAD in financing from
the Government of Canada.
11
--- PAGE 12 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Roadmap to Build 3 Million Housing Units
elsewhere or in Cascadia, how much capital
investment is required, and how time-consuming and
“I really think the focus has to be difficult implementation would be.
on the supply side. The challenge
By focusing on these metrics, we have identified
is that there’s not a lot that the federal
the most actionable and high-impact steps to solve
government can do. A lot of it is sort of
Cascadia’s housing shortage. However, none of
local zoning, local regulatory hurdles.” these alone can bridge our housing supply gap – we
must pursue all in concert if we hope to address the
Mark Fleming, Chief Economist, First
critical housing needs of our region. The individual
American Financial Corp.
components of this strategy are outlined here, with
a recommendation for a comprehensive solution
that integrates these opportunities described in the
T here is no single solution to solving Cascadia’s following section.
housing supply crisis, but there are identified
1. Land: Unlock developable land through zoning
key policy changes—focused on land, economics,
reform
permitting, and innovation—that could make the
biggest impact at the state and local levels. These 2. Economics: Deploy low-cost capital and
recommendations are designed to generate the incentivize workforce housing development
highest return on housing supply over the next
3. Permitting: Remove barriers to development,
20 years—without them, we cannot meet our
including timely, standardized permitting
region’s needs.
across land use and building permits
To zero in on the most effective solutions, two main 4. Innovation: Adopt supportive strategies,
criteria were used to identify the most effective including technology solutions and innovative
solutions: impact to housing supply and feasibility. construction methods, to improve process
Impact was analyzed by looking at how many units efficiency and bring down development costs
could be added with the policy change, as well as how
All of these opportunities should be supported by
the policy lowers per unit development costs, which
public-private partnerships and robust tracking
directly impacts affordability for renters or buyers.
and accountability mechanisms to ensure they are
Feasibility was assessed by looking at whether the
implemented thoughtfully, thoroughly, and efficiently.
policy or solution had been successfully implemented
12
--- PAGE 13 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
Build Up of Potential Impact from Baseline Housing Production to 2044 Housing Needs Target
Housing baseline production to needs — individual contribution of key actions, 2024-2044 directional
Innovation:
LAND: Permitting: Housing
Economics: ~25k
~1.4M ~110k ~125k Needs by
2044:
Baseline Redevelopment Expand bond Accelerate permit Adopt additional
~3M
potential issuance and approvals and supportive
Production
from rezoning waive fees/ pre-approved strategies to
2024:
commercial costs/taxes for plans for bring down costs
corridors affordable housing affordable and speed up
~2M
projects housing projects development
Radical zoning changes are necessary to bridge the supply gap yet not sufficient to meet 2044 housing need; additional
policy changes enabling to decrease cost of developing affordable housing units are equally critical.
LAND stores surrounded by empty parking lots, strip malls
with shuttered storefronts, and abandoned shopping
Commercial Corridor Rezoning and
centers on city outskirts. Zoned solely for commercial
Transit-Oriented Development use, these spaces are left blighted and wasted as
consumer habits shift away from brick-and-mortar
Goal: Expand access to developable land
retail, accelerated by the Great Recession and COVID
Summary: Allow mixed-use, high-density pandemic. This is not just a Cascadia issue; it is a
developments in underutilized commercial areas and nationwide problem. The US has six times more retail
near transit hubs, and support building housing on space per capita than Europe, and both Canada and
idle or underused religious and government property the US lead the world in retail space per capita. This
overbuilding of retail capacity is leading to decaying
Housing Units Unlocked: Up to 1,440,000 across
properties, falling commercial real estate values, and
Cascadia by 2044
shrinking local tax revenues as shopping increasingly
moves online.
A cross Cascadia, developable land is scarce and
one of the most expensive components of any
project. Topographical constraints like mountains,
forests, and bodies of water limit options, while
restrictive zoning laws and environmental regulations
further reduce the pool of suitable sites. Even when
land is identified, the lack of necessary infrastructure
such as roads, utilities, and public services can delay
projects and inflate costs, rendering many potential
developments financially unfeasible. Rezoning
commercial corridors and upzoning near mass
transit are among the most impactful ways to unlock
underutilized land for much-needed housing.
Commercial Corridor Rezoning
Communities grappling with a lack of affordable
housing are also plagued by a surplus of vacant, Shuttered and vacant retail space and parking lots are the types of
underused retail spaces. These eyesores are commercial properties that could be strong candidates for mixed use
everywhere: empty Toys R Us and other big box redevelopment.
13
--- PAGE 14 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
E stimates for Cascadia, focused on the corridor across all eligible parcels was 20 times greater than
surrounding I-5, indicate that rezoning of the existing assessed values. This indicates cities can
commercial corridors on main streets in small towns, expect to see an increase in property taxes in rezoned
strip retail, office parks, big-box sites on the edges and redeveloped commercial corridors.
of town, and other underutilized commercial areas—
Broad rezoning of commercial areas allows market
not including any industrial lands, which would be
forces to determine the areas that make the most
excluded from rezoning—could unlock capacity for
financial sense for redevelopment. For example,
up to 5.1 million housing units across the Cascadia
vibrant stretches of retail or hubs of community
corridor. Of these units, we expect that roughly 1.4
activity would remain, while redevelopment of a
million have redevelopment potential, which means
shuttered strip mall in a suburban area would likely
those units are most likely to be economically viable
“pencil” for a developer.
for redevelopment. This was done by examining which
parcels have a land value that exceeds the building
Analysis also shows that multifamily developments
value, with twofold benefits to this methodology: First,
in rezoned commercial corridors have the potential
it excludes those properties that are already occupied
to have lower environmental impacts than average
by productive businesses, and second, it indicates
household use, ranging from 45% lower energy use
where rezoning has the greatest potential to increase
to 60% lower water use.11 These corridors also tend to
property values. For example, when similar estimates
be located away from climate hazard zones such as
were done in California, it was found that the value
flooding and wildfires, increasing their resilience.
of all market-feasible development opportunities
Redevelopment Potential
Total 12,938 Acres
Total 1,443,180 DU
Seattle Area 674,958 du
Portland Area 400,272 du
Metro Vancouver, BC 367,950 du
14
--- PAGE 15 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
Transit-Oriented Development near transit. Portland has seen significant growth in
transit-oriented projects, with incentives designed to
While commercial corridor rezoning is one piece of the
boost housing supply and affordability near transit
puzzle in unlocking more developable land for new
corridors. British Columbia offers another model.
housing units, Cascadia’s jurisdictions can also learn
The province’s approach focuses on TOD through
from one another on how to increase density in the
its Metro Vancouver 2040 strategy, which integrates
places best equipped to support it. Transit-oriented
transit planning with housing development. Key transit
development (TOD) presents a significant opportunity
corridors have been rezoned to prioritize mixed-use
to encourage and support housing growth near mass
and higher-density housing, contributing to both
transit options like light rail and bus rapid transit.
housing affordability and environmental sustainability.
By increasing density near transit hubs, Cascadia
can unlock thousands of new housing units while Washington has begun taking steps in this direction
reducing reliance on cars and promoting sustainable with policies aimed at streamlining zoning and
urban growth. TOD supports the creation of vibrant, permitting processes near transit corridors. The
walkable communities where residents can live, work, University of Washington Mobility Innovation
and access essential services without the need for Center’s 2023 Report, “Finding Common Ground:
long commutes. Best Practices for State Policies Supporting
Transit-Oriented Development,” shares detailed
Oregon and British Columbia have already taken bold
recommendations for how Washington can take
steps to encourage TOD. In 2019, Oregon passed
advantage of the low-hanging fruit offered by
legislation eliminating single-family zoning in many
thoughtfully implemented TOD policies.
cities and promoting higher-density development
15
--- PAGE 16 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
Redeveloping Underutilized Government
and Religious Property
In addition to broad rezoning of commercial corridors
and supporting transit-oriented development,
underutilized government and religious properties offer
a prime—though less scalable—opportunity for housing
development. Land, which comprises about 10% of
developments costs, is finite and scarce in centrally
located and desirable urban areas, driving up expenses
and limiting development opportunities. In a post-
COVID, hybrid work environment, about 20-30% of
government buildings are vacant in Washington State.12
At the same time, declining birth rates and public
School converted to senior housing.
school enrollment have led to 0.5-1.5% of schools
closing every year,13 and religious congregations
The BC Builds program offers a roadmap for how
are shrinking. Church leaders across Cascadia have
government property can be put to its best use. BC
expressed interest in repurposing their large properties
Builds identifies underutilized government, community,
and land holdings for affordable housing, which
and non-profit properties, partners with developers,
many religious leaders view as aligned with their
and facilitates financing to optimize land use and
organization’s mission. In Seattle, religious groups own
provide affordable housing to low and middle-income
roughly 1% of all land in the city,14 and Vancouver has at
households. Washington State ranks third in the US
least 323 lots owned by faith-based groups.15
for the number of government-owned parcels in
transit accessible urban areas,16 and redeveloping
Examples of successful redevelopments and existing
just a fraction of these could yield thousands of
policies:
additional housing units. Using conservative estimates
⊲ Government office redevelopment: Ireland’s Land for vacancy rates and feasibility, government offices,
Development Agency identified vacant government schools, and church properties could be converted or
properties that could be converted into affordable redeveloped to create 1,700-2,000 new housing units
housing units. In 2022, approximately 5,500 were across Cascadia every year. These conversions and
created across ten sites. new developments are aligned with the missions of
government and religious landowners and allow us to
⊲ Schools: The NY Housing Plan has created 39
optimize existing infrastructure and utilities, which can
apartments in the former Bryant School in Hornell,
be another barrier to new development.
NY, for households earning 60% AMI or below. The
project used $14.3 million sourced from federal and
To streamline the conversion of unused government
state tax credits, subsidies, and local agreements,
and religiously owned property into residential
with a focus on sustainability. The property
housing, government agencies at all levels will need
contains studios, 1-bedroom and 2-bedroom units,
to collaborate with community organizations and
a community kitchen, fitness center, laundry room,
religious institutions to identify potential structures. A
storage facilities, playground, and green space.
proactive feasibility assessment focusing on structural
⊲ Churches: Washington HB 1377 allows municipalities integrity, zoning allowances, and layout suitability is a
to provide a density bonus for housing on church- prerequisite for development. For eligible government
owned properties that is affordable for households parcels, standardized guidelines for redevelopment,
making up to 80% AMI. The City of Bellevue including affordability expectations, need to be
amended its land use code to allow properties developed and supported by clear public bidding
owned by religious organizations and located in processes. Additionally, expedited permitting should
single family land use districts to be rezoned to also be applied to these conversion projects, with
permit permanently affordable multifamily housing. progress tracked through annual reports detailing
costs, timelines, and outcomes.
16
--- PAGE 17 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
ECONOMICS provide low-cost loans to developers and expand the
pool of available capital for 60-120% AMI housing.
Provide Low-Cost Capital and Incentives
Microsoft pioneered this effort with Renton Housing
to Help Finance Workforce Housing Authority, and taxable bonds for housing purposes
have been implemented in many municipalities in
Goal: Help make projects “pencil” by increasing
the U.S. (e.g., New York, Denver, Philadelphia) and
access to low-cost financing and reducing
internationally. State-level legislative action to support
development costs
local governments and housing authorities to leverage
Summary: Expand bond issuance to fund new and their bonding authority for this purpose could include
existing government programs with relevant expertise funding or technical assistance to cover or reduce
and track records to provide low-cost loans to bond issuance costs or matching funds for housing
developers across the project lifecycle. Deploy other bonds for affordable and workforce housing.
incentives, including time-limited tax exemptions,
reduction of parking minimums, and reduction
of impact fees to reduce development costs and
“Securing financing is incredibly
encourage new construction
challenging right now due to high interest
Housing Units Unlocked: 110,000 units across
rates and lenders’ low risk tolerance. Affordable
Cascadia by 2044
housing developers often need to obtain
funding from up to 15 different sources.”
T he complexity of securing funding for affordable
and workforce housing projects, combined with Developer
the challenges of making a pro forma “pencil,” further
restrict housing production. Capital stacks often
involve multiple layers of financing, each with its own
To launch a successful bond-financed housing initiative,
set of requirements, timelines, and risks. Today’s high
it is essential to pinpoint the right intermediaries and
interest rates and the conservative lending practices of
fund managers. Large urban housing authorities—
commercial banks add another layer of difficulty. This
like Metro Vancouver Housing, King County Housing
challenging environment underscores the need for new
Authority, and Home Forward in Multnomah County—
innovative financing solutions that streamline funding
are ideally positioned to lead these efforts, thanks
processes and reduce reliance on traditional capital
to their ability to integrate local policy changes that
markets, which are ill-suited to the current demands of
maximize the effectiveness of funding. State and local
affordable and workforce housing development.
housing authorities will act as key intermediaries,
issuing bonds, managing debt repayment, and
Deploy Low-Cost Capital
directing funds to developers. Financial institutions can
Providing additional low-cost capital to developers help facilitate bond sales, while large companies with
would help them circumvent the burden of high an interest in housing (e.g., Microsoft, Amazon) may
financing costs, especially as construction loan invest in bonds directly. Private developers can team
interest rates have risen by 2 percentage points up with nonprofits to ensure capital raised turns into
between 2022 and 2024. This need is amplified by housing on the ground.
the over-subscription of programs like the Low-Income
Establishing clear criteria for bond proceeds—such
Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) program and tax-exempt
as 60-120% AMI and requirements around the
bonds. At the same time, private companies are
inclusion of family-sized units—and aligning projects
increasingly drawn to safer investment vehicles. The
with local market needs, will ensure a streamlined,
challenge is further compounded by the timing issues
effective rollout. Incentives like tax exemptions for
related to pre-development funding, which is critical
local institutional investors will further accelerate
for getting projects off the ground but is often the
investment, ensuring the success of this critical
hardest to secure.
housing strategy. Recently, King County in Washington
One key mechanism for raising additional capital is has considered issuing $1 billion in bonds to fund
to expand the use of taxable housing bonds issued affordable housing, which could provide a proof point
by housing authorities or local governments to for other local governments and housing authorities.
17
--- PAGE 18 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
CASE STUDY
Philadelphia’s Neighborhood Preservation Initiative
Funded by several rounds of social bond issuances by the City of Philadelphia, the
Neighborhood Preservation Initiative (NPI) is investing $400 Million in programs
that expand and protect affordable housing options, keep Philadelphia owners and
renters in their homes, improve housing quality, and promote homeownership.
The Philadelphia Housing Development Corporation (PHDC) is responsible for
administering many of the housing programs funded by NPI.
Capital Units Households
Raised Created Benefited
$400 million 1,500 12,800
Local government mobilizes private & public resources to lower cost of financing to
developers.
Investors Social Bonds Intermediary Developers
(e.g., public, & Social (e.g.,
private, Philadelphia’s
Impact Bonds
philanthropy) NPI run by
Short term
PHDC)
(3-5 years)
investment
vehicles
18
--- PAGE 19 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
Provide Incentives to Build
Workforce Housing
Beyond financing housing development directly, we
also have a suite of tools we can use to incentivize
production of affordable and workforce housing
and further bring down development costs. Pairing
these tax exemptions with additional state or local
incentives—such as reducing fees for projects that
meet affordability benchmarks or simplifying the
permitting process—could create a holistic framework
to make these developments financially feasible. Key
opportunities for action include, but are not limited to: areas. By further reducing parking minimums—or
eliminating them entirely—we can allow developers to
Time-limited tax exemptions: Property tax build the parking needed by the local market without
exemptions – often referred to as incentives or hewing to outdated parking mandates.
abatement – for multifamily housing is a key tool
for production of housing. Some jurisdictions in Waiving, reducing, or adjusting impact fees: Impact
Washington State already use multi-family tax fees, also called development charges, are one-
exemptions (MFTE) to provide time-limited property time charges imposed by local governments on
tax exemptions to affordable housing projects. new development projects to address the increased
Reconfiguring MFTE programs or exploring other demand for services created by new residents. Fees
options or configurations for property tax abatement vary significantly by jurisdiction, and in some areas,
(e.g., to fund inclusionary zoning) could also help can exceed $20,000 per unit, particularly in high-
incentivize affordable and workforce housing demand regions. Metro Vancouver recently approved
production. Understanding the high cost of housing an increase to development charges that will bring
in New York City, the state has long had a robust the cost per unit for a townhome and an apartment
tax abatement program. In 2024, the state updated unit to over $30,000 and $20,000, respectively.19
their program to include 100% exemption for 35- High fees often disincentivize development, especially
40 years while adding additional affordability and in areas where density is crucial to meet housing
labor requirements. In 2024, Baltimore enacted new targets. To mitigate these adverse impacts, impact
inclusionary zoning requirements that mandate a fees can be capped at a more manageable level or
certain number of affordable units in buildings with the cost of growth can be spread across broader
more than 20 units, with the city offsetting the actual tax bases, rather than disproportionately burdening
lost rent (i.e., the difference between market rate and new developments. Another option is to adjust when
affordable rent) for each calendar year as a property impact fees are assessed, as some developers
tax credit on the following year’s tax bill.17 have suggested that tying payment to receipt of the
certificate of occupancy could ease some financing
Waiving or reducing parking minimums: A single constraints. These approaches would help balance
surface parking stall can cost $20,000-$60,000 infrastructure needs with the necessity of accelerating
to build, adding 5-10% to the cost of construction housing production.
and over $200 to monthly rent for tenants.18 At the
same time, transit connectivity in urban centers has Sales tax exemptions: Sales tax exemptions for
continued to improve, while car ownership rates have affordable and workforce housing can be used to
continued to decline in parts of the mega-region. further reduce the cost of development, allowing
Cascadia has made some progress on reducing new construction to “pencil” for developers. They
parking minimums. Oregon mandates the elimination have been used in Washington State to encourage
of parking minimums in 48 cities and 8 metropolitan office-to-residential conversion and building
regions, especially near high-frequency transit—one of affordable housing on state land. A broader
the most progressive parking policies in the country. exemption, tied to inclusionary requirements,
British Columbia restricts local governments from could help increase development at desired
imposing parking requirements in transit-oriented affordability levels.
19
--- PAGE 20 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
PERMITTING
Remove Barriers to Development “Current timelines are roughly four years
from design review to occupancy – this
Goal: Ensure local governments use a timely and
eviscerates our supply cycle. Every day you’re
appropriate review process for housing projects for
not building you’re just paying to hold land.”
both land use and building permits
Developer
Summary: Expedite permitting by implementing
standardized, fast-track review processes for
affordable and workforce housing, using pre-
approved building designs, allowing auto-approvals
found that a six-month longer approval timeline for
for compliant projects, and offering self-certification
residential development is associated with an almost
programs to accelerate housing development and
4 percentage point decrease in housing production.22
remove unnecessary delays
The root cause of these inefficiencies lies in outdated,
Housing Units Unlocked: 125,000 units across overburdened regulatory frameworks and insufficient
Cascadia by 2044 staffing in permitting offices, which are unable to
keep pace with the urgency of the housing crisis.
G overnment requirements have a direct and With meaningful reforms, government regulations can
often negative impact on the overall cost of boost production.
housing development. Lengthy permitting processes
For developers, time is money. Permitting delays are
for land use and building permits, coupled with the
costly for developers because they increase financing
unpredictability of environmental and design reviews,
costs due to extended loan periods and interest
introduce significant delays that can impair project
payments. Developers must also continue to pay other
timelines and budgets. These delays not only increase
holding costs, like property taxes and security costs.
direct costs but also inject a level of uncertainty that
These delays can drive up overall project expenses
can deter investment altogether. Costs associated
as labor and material costs escalate over time and
with regulations are estimated to comprise 30-
market conditions shift, making developments
43% of the cost of multifamily development.20 In a
less financially viable. In fact, the cost of delays is
comparison between the cost of development in
six times greater than the cost of permitting fees
Portland and Denver, soft costs were estimated to
themselves—up to $45,000 per unit in a typical 120-
be 16% lower in Denver due to a transparent and
unit multifamily development. Additionally, uncertainty
fast permitting approval process.21 A Canadian study
around permit timelines increases risk for developers,
potentially deterring investment or leading to project
cancellations.
Litigation during the land use permitting process, such
as under Washington’s State Environmental Policy
Act (SEPA) or Oregon’s Statewide Planning Goals,
can significantly delay the approval and development
of housing projects. Environmental regulations are
critical to managing sustainability and conservation
goals, but opponents of a project, such as community
groups or environmental organizations, sometimes
use state environmental and planning laws to file
lawsuits or appeals for the intended purpose of
slowing down the permitting process by months
or even years. Such lengthy delays can increase
costs for developers, and in some cases, prolonged
litigation may deter developers from pursuing projects
altogether, exacerbating the housing shortage.
20
--- PAGE 21 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
Understanding the Permitting Process
Land use permits govern how a piece of land can be developed or used. They ensure that the
proposed development aligns with local zoning laws, environmental regulations, and urban
planning strategies. This process often includes reviews of site plans, environmental impact
assessments, and adherence to zoning restrictions like height limits or density requirements.
Public input and hearings may be required, and the timeline for approval can vary widely
depending on the jurisdiction and complexity of the project.
Building permits focus on the technical aspects of construction. These permits ensure that the
building design meets local safety codes and standards, covering areas like structural integrity,
fire safety, electrical systems, plumbing, and accessibility. The building permit phase includes
reviews of architectural drawings and engineering plans to verify compliance with building codes
and regulations. Once the permit is issued, inspections are conducted throughout the construction
process to ensure adherence to the approved plans.
The key difference between these two permits is that land use permits address what can be
built and where, while building permits deal with how the construction is carried out in a safe
and compliant manner. Delays in either phase can slow down housing development, with many
jurisdictions struggling to manage prolonged review timelines.
Several revision cycles occur between multiple departments from start to finish in the entitlement
and permitting processes (~12-36 months total permitting timeline in many jurisdictions)
Land use permit (i.e., entitlement) Building permit
~6-12 months ~6-24 months
Land Use Building
Land Use Building
Project Permit Permit
Permit Permit
Initiation application application
Key approval approval
review review
Stakeholders
Developer receives
Developer proposes land use and building
Developer
new project permits and moves to
construction phase
Architect produces Architect produces
Developer hires
Architects/ architect to draft plans planning documents, planning documents,
submits application for submits application for
Engineers and manage permit permit, and addresses permit, and addresses
documents
comments comments
Planning department Planning department
Once all comments Once all comments
Planning reviews application are closed, planning reviews application are closed, planning
documents and notifies documents and notifies
Department other stakeholders for department approves other stakeholders for department approves
land use permit building permit
comment comment
Public Departments review Departments review
documents, provide documents, provide
Departments comments comments
Environmental
Special Interest (e.g., SEPA), historical
preservation, and other
Groups interest groups review
documents
Public hearings are
conducted via design
Community
review boards (if
required)
21
--- PAGE 22 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
W hile permitting is the mandate of local housing developments that include affordable units
governments, both local jurisdictions and state/ from the city’s design review process, which is
provincial governments can take action that could estimated to save nine months during the permitting
expedite review processes to encourage additional process,24 and other jurisdictions could follow suit to
housing production. We have successful precedents on shave time off development timelines and increase
the West Coast and beyond, and Oregon has already the speed to occupancy for new housing.
taken state-level action to ensure local governments
Pre-approved building plans: While preapproved
are issuing final decisions on land use permits within
building plans for accessory dwelling units
120 days of receiving a complete application. However,
(ADUs) have become popular policy in many local
more can be done, and key opportunities include:
jurisdictions, policymakers can extend this to
Ministerial review process: A state-level ministerial multifamily development, too. Kelowna and North
review process provides an administrative evaluation Okanagan, British Columbia have adopted pre-
of development projects based on objective, approved building plans for multiplexes up to six-
established criteria without requiring discretionary plexes as part of their efforts to densify via infill
judgment by local officials. In this process, if a development. An early version of the program was
project complies with all relevant zoning, building so popular in Kelowna that they stopped offering
codes, and other regulations, it must be approved fast-track approval for preapproved designs
as a matter of right. This type of review contrasts because planners were concerned about increasing
with discretionary review, where decision-makers homogeneity in infill development. Now, the program
can exercise judgment and take public input, often has relaunched, and as developers submit new
resulting in longer approval times and the potential plans for approval, they are added to the binder
for rejection. Removal of discretionary processes can of preapproved options for future development to
also help reduce workloads for overburdened local ensure increasing diversity and variety of designs.
permitting offices, freeing up capacity for other work. The state and provincial governments could support
In California, SB 35 established a ministerial review local jurisdictions by offering preapproved designs
for the entitlement process, which applies to infill for multifamily developments that could be easily
affordable housing projects in jurisdictions that are not adopted by local jurisdictions to accelerate building
meeting state affordable housing goals. The process permit review.
expedited the entitlement process for 156 projects
Self-certification of building plans: Outside of
between 2018 and 2023, allowing for the creation
Cascadia, some jurisdictions—including Phoenix and
of 18,000 new housing units, and it was extended
New York City—have instituted programs to allow
to 2036 and expanded to include mixed-income
qualified architects and engineers to self-certify
development by follow-up legislation.23
that building plans comply with municipal building
Other examples take ministerial review a step further, construction codes. Phoenix’s self-certification
offering auto-approval for projects that meet certain program, in place since 2010 and expanded in
criteria. Minnesota has default approval on certain types 2012 to include all buildings except high-rises and
of zoning variance and land use permits, while Japan stadiums, has successfully reduced the burden on
has a “by-right” system: if a plan satisfies the standards, public departments while accelerating building permit
project is permitted without discretionary review. issuance. Right now, processing of self-certified
building plans is averaging 14 calendar days. The
Design review changes: Design review is a process
program includes both random and required audits
in which development projects are evaluated for
depending on the nature and complexity of each
their aesthetic, architectural, and environmental
project. Permit submission requirements include
impact before approval. This review ensures that new
structural and electrical peer reviews, and failure to
buildings and developments align with the design
submit corrections to building violations may result
standards, visual character, and overall goals of the
in loss of self-certification privileges.25 Funding from
community or city. However, design review processes
state or provincial government sources could support
are often highly subjective and create a high level
the development of a pilot self-certification program in
of timing uncertainty during the permitting process.
select Cascadia jurisdictions.
The City of Seattle has temporarily exempted some
22
--- PAGE 23 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
CASE STUDY
Los Angeles Mayor Karen Bass’s Executive Directive 1
to Fast-Track Entitlement
Mayor Karen Bass’s Executive Directive 1 (ED 1), introduced in December 2022, is a bold effort
to expedite affordable housing development in Los Angeles by streamlining the permitting
process for 100% affordable housing projects. ED 1 aims to reduce delays by cutting through
bureaucratic red tape, prioritizing projects, and offering a 60-day timeline for approvals on
eligible developments. This initiative addresses LA’s housing crisis by removing barriers such
as discretionary reviews and California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) processes for
qualifying projects, allowing developers to accelerate their affordable housing plans.
To qualify for the expedited review process, submitted projects must have specific
affordability requirements, meet overall design standards, and adhere to environmental
safety measures, among other key requirements.
As of summer 2024, over 18,000 affordable housing units have been approved under this
directive in its first 18 months, with a median approval timeline of 96 days—above the target
timeline but still substantially better than non-fast tracked projects.26 This is more than three
times the number of approved affordable units in 2020, 2021, or 2022. Projects are typically
eligible for a state-level density bonus or city-level transit-oriented communities program,
and 85% of projects utilize incentives under one of these two programs. However, between
65-75% of projects approved under ED 1 do not require direct public investment.27
By eliminating bottlenecks and creating clear timelines, ED 1 provides a powerful model for
other cities seeking to address their housing crises through expedited permitting processes.
23
--- PAGE 24 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
INNOVATION meet zoning and building code requirements, which
accelerates the approval of routine permits. Self-
Adopt Additional Supportive Strategies
certification programs, enabled by digital platforms,
to Bring Down Building Costs and Speed also empower developers to submit pre-approved
Up Development plans without requiring exhaustive manual review,
freeing up staff to focus on more complex cases.
Goal: Reduce development costs and improve
Customer service within permitting offices can benefit
development processes by holistically addressing the
from technology-driven solutions such as digital
largest costs and most time-consuming processes for
chatbots or AI-powered response systems to handle
developers.
routine inquiries and guide applicants through the
Summary: Construction costs, including materials
process. This reduces the strain on staff, allowing them
and labor, are one of the largest cost drivers for
to focus on higher-value tasks, and provides quicker
developers. It is an area ripe for innovation to
response times to developers, speeding up project
speed up processes and reduce costs. At the same
progress. Additionally, integrated online portals allow
time, technology can be applied throughout the
developers to track permit progress, pay fees, and
development process to improve timeliness, address
submit required documentation, reducing bottlenecks
labor shortages, and streamline processes for all
caused by paperwork and in-person meetings.
stakeholders.
Housing Units Unlocked: 25,000 units across
Cascadia by 2044.
T he lack of advanced technology in housing
development across Cascadia presents a
significant challenge to addressing the region’s
growing housing crisis. Outdated permitting
processes, reliant on manual paper-based
workflows, slow down project approvals and add
costly delays. Without integrated systems that
streamline communication between developers, local
governments, and regulatory bodies, housing projects
Example: Kelowna’s Chatbot
are bogged down by inefficiencies and inconsistent
reviews. In areas like modular construction and mass Kelowna has implemented an AI chatbot
timber, the adoption of tech-driven innovations is to streamline its permitting processes,
critical to reducing construction timelines and costs, significantly speeding up application reviews.
but the region has been slow to scale these methods. Partnering with Microsoft, the city has piloted
an AI-powered bot that processes digital
Adopt Technology Solutions that permit applications in minutes, rather than
Increase Efficiency throughout the weeks, by automatically checking submissions
for compliance with zoning bylaws, community
Development Process
plans, and lot specifications. This allows
Technology can be a game-changer in the housing the system to quickly approve compliant
development process by streamlining permitting, applications or flag non-compliant ones
improving manufacturing efficiency, and supporting with detailed feedback for corrections. This
customer service in permitting offices. It can also be technology reduces the workload on human
critical to supporting local governments struggling staff, allowing them to focus on more complex
with adequate resourcing. Deploying digital tools permits and inspections. This approach not
such as automated permit review systems, artificial only cuts down on waiting times but also
intelligence (AI), and cloud-based platforms allows reduces the costs associated with prolonged
permitting offices to manage their backlog and development timelines.
approve compliant projects more quickly. For example,
automated software can flag areas where projects
24
--- PAGE 25 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
I n the manufacturing stage, the integration of our regulatory framework lacks elements supporting
technology such as prefabrication and modular modular/panelized construction (e.g., design codes
construction methods can drastically reduce build are not adapted for mass timber). On the financing
times by up to 50% and construction costs by up side, some banks are unfamiliar with the modular
to 20%. These methods use offsite construction in construction process and unwilling to risk financing
controlled environments, allowing for faster assembly less familiar development methods. Local funding
on-site. Advanced construction technologies, such as opportunities often do not include modular/panelized
robotics and 3D printing, can also help reduce labor construction methods in their requests for proposals
demands in the field, addressing ongoing workforce (RFPs), while insurers are unclear on the long-term
shortages in the construction industry. These durability of the structures.
techniques not only speed up production but also
By leveraging these technologies across various
result in more consistent quality and reduced waste,
stages of development—from permitting to
offering cost efficiencies to developers and reducing
construction—municipalities and developers
overall project timelines.
can increase project timeliness and lower costs.
Right now, modular and panelized construction Success will require standardized and streamlined
in Cascadia holds the most promise for reducing regulation to provide clear, consistent guidelines
construction costs but faces two key barriers: across jurisdictions, which can reduce confusion and
regulatory gaps in supporting these construction encourage the widespread use of new technologies.
methods, and lack of scalability primarily due to the Facilitation of data sharing across platforms and
difficulty in securing financing and insurance. Local between public and private entities can also help
authorities have limited understanding of how to optimize technology usage.
inspect the quality and safety of modular units, and
Example: Autovol’s Robotic Manufacturing
Autovol, based in Nampa, Idaho, uses an innovative
manufacturing technique dubbed automated
volumetric modular construction. This process uses
advanced robotics to assemble six-sided modular
units in a controlled environment, complete with
appliances, fixtures, and mechanical, electrical,
plumbing (MEP) systems. Once these modules
are built, they are shipped to the job site for final
assembly.
The use of robotics has significantly accelerated
construction timelines while reducing costs. For
example, Autovol’s Virginia Street Studios project
in San Jose, which used 160 modules to create 301
affordable housing units, was completed 40% faster
than traditional methods. Additionally, the cost per
square foot for this project was reduced by $100,
yielding a 20% savings compared to conventional
construction in high-cost areas like the Bay Area.
By integrating technology, Autovol not only addresses
the construction labor shortage but also makes it
possible to scale affordable housing more efficiently.
25
--- PAGE 26 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
The Roadmap to Build (cont’d)
Support Use of Innovative Mass timber is an innovative construction material
made from layers of wood that are compressed and
Construction Materials
bonded together to create large, strong panels. It
Materials make up roughly 25% of the cost of offers a sustainable alternative to steel and concrete,
development for new housing units on average, with a significantly lower carbon footprint. Oregon,
with labor comprising another 23%. These costs Washington, and British Columbia—known for their
are typically difficult to change without sacrificing vast forestry resources—have already embraced
quality, but novel construction materials—paired mass timber as a key component of their housing and
with technological innovation and new construction construction strategies, but it has not yet achieved
methods—offer an opportunity to do just that. widespread adoption. Oregon and British Columbia
have led by incorporating mass timber into both public
Modular and panelized construction can make use
and private developments, positioning the region as a
of one of the most exciting materials innovations and
global leader in sustainable construction.
an area where Cascadia is a leader: mass timber.
Benefits of Mass Timber Prefabrication
High strength- Prefabricated as large Biophilic structure Time and cost savings
to-weight ratio but light weight panels Low carbon footprint Rapid onsite assembly
Best suited for Easier to handle materials with & efficient factory
mid-rise projects and requires less natural aesthetics manufacturing help
up to 18 stories foundational support reduce labor cost
Examples of Affordable Multi-Family Mass Timber Buildings
1510 Webster, Oakland, CA
Key figures
⊲ 19 stories with 222 units
⊲ 35 are affordable to households at 80% AMI
⊲ Comparable concrete option would have cost $30M more
Key facts
⊲ The light weight yet structurally strong mass timber reduced the
foundation needs and supporting columns (-47 per floor)
⊲ All 16 floors of mass timber were installed in <4 months, with the entire
project finished 1-month earlier than scheduled
1470 Block Line Road, Ontario, BC
Key figures
⊲ 4 stories, 23K sq ft, 41-unit residential to support women who experienced
homelessness
Key facts
⊲ A core requirement of the funding is that the project is built quickly
⊲ Mass timber concept outbid all other affordable designs
⊲ Design, approval and construction were completed in 1 year of contract
award, where the assembly itself was 20 days
⊲ Won 2 city awards for innovation and sustainability
26
--- PAGE 27 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Foundational Elements for Success
A chieving Cascadia’s ambitious housing targets investors, and communities—work toward the
will require more than just policy changes; it common goal of increasing housing supply.
will require a strong foundation of public-private
partnership and robust accountability measures. Tracking Progress and Ensuring
Governments can create favorable policy conditions, Accountability
reduce barriers, and provide financial incentives,
Accountability is essential to ensure leaders at all
while private developers, investors, and nonprofits
levels of government deliver on our housing targets.
can deliver housing solutions with efficiency and
To solve Cascadia’s housing crisis, we must strike the
innovation. At the same time, tracking progress,
right balance between incentives and enforcement—
evaluating outcomes, and holding each stakeholder
using both carrots and sticks to drive progress.
accountable to their commitments will be critical in
Transparent tracking of housing production and
closing the housing gap on time and within budget.
policy outcomes will hold governments accountable,
maintaining urgency to meet our ambitious goals.
The Necessity of Public-Private
This is not a set-it-and-forget-it challenge; we must
Partnership
regularly evaluate our efforts, be willing to course-
Too often, government stakeholders, developers, and correct when needed, and ensure no jurisdiction
community members view one another as adversaries falls behind.
in managing land use policy and addressing our
British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon have
region’s need for more housing to accommodate
each set housing targets at the local level, either
a growing population. However, the scale of the
by county or municipality. Local governments are
problem necessitates a cultural shift and reemphasis
expected and encouraged to develop comprehensive
on true public-private collaboration and partnership
plans to meet their targets, but effective tracking
if we hope to achieve the housing production scale
mechanisms are still emerging or in development,
required to increase affordability for current and
and reinforcement of these efforts is critical to ensure
future Cascadians.
we are making progress. Objective housing targets
Public-private partnership takes a variety of forms. and shared reporting standards are important tools
One clear example of their power is the use of to provide clarity to jurisdictions on desired and
government-provided low-cost capital and tax-exempt expected outcomes, and incentive and enforcement
bond financing, which can make housing projects mechanisms are also needed to ensure delivery on
financially feasible for developers. At the same housing goals.
time, private sector innovation—in everything from
So far, Washington, Oregon, and British Columbia have
technological solutions to construction methods—
largely used incentives or voluntary, opt-in policies
can help speed up housing production, while public
to encourage development-friendly local regulations
entities provide the necessary legal and regulatory
in local jurisdictions. The depth of our affordability
framework to facilitate large-scale developments.
challenges and the wide gap between our current
This collaborative approach also fosters a culture of
housing production levels and the targets we’ve set
shared responsibility across sectors, ensuring that all
indicate the need for better tracking and enforcement.
stakeholders—including governments, developers,
27
--- PAGE 28 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Foundational Elements to Success (cont’d)
O ne effective mechanism used elsewhere is a governments implement policies that will increase
builder’s remedy, which allows developers to housing supply. California’s Housing Accountability
bypass certain local zoning regulations if a jurisdiction Unit, created during the 2021-2022 budget cycle,
is not meeting its housing production targets. By is composed of a team of housing policy experts
removing obstacles, a builder’s remedy can fast-track that help local planning departments and other
housing development, increasing supply in regions stakeholder navigate new policies. Developers and
where local restrictions have historically stalled local governments can appeal to the unit to advise
progress. Support for adequate resourcing for local on projects and assess policy compliance, and the
governments—such as via investments in technology Housing Accountability Unit acts as a mediator to
that can reduce the workload for overburdened review projects and provide recommendations. The
permitting staff—are critical to ensuring that the Unit also has the power to refer unresolved issues to
builder’s remedy is used as an effective policy tool the state Attorney General if corrective actions are
to encourage compliance with state housing law. not taken.
The builder’s remedy has been successfully used in
Oregon’s new Housing Accountability and Production
California to spur local jurisdictions into compliance,
Office, launching in July 2025, aims to bridge
most notably in Santa Monica, where some 16 projects
the gap between state housing laws and local
with over 4,500 housing units secured their approvals
implementation by providing critical partnership,
under the builder’s remedy before the city came into
funding, and technical support to reduce barriers to
compliance with state requirements.28
housing production. This office will play a key role in
Yet, enforcement requires a robust, timely helping local governments navigate regulations, share
understanding of how local jurisdictions are doing in best practices, and stay on track to meet housing
meeting their housing targets. Some jurisdictions, like production targets by ensuring compliance with
Kirkland, Washington, already use effective online state policies.
dashboards to track progress, including metrics like
Tracking, enforcement, and accountability are
the gap to target affordable housing units, breakdown
essential to making sure that jurisdictions stay on
of housing supply neighborhood, and breakdown of
course to meet their housing targets. By transparently
new housing permits by type (e.g., multifamily, single-
monitoring housing progress and ensuring adherence
family, ADU). The State of California also provides
to targets, the state will be able to quickly identify
a statewide exemplar that leverages standardized,
issues, make necessary adjustments, and guarantee
mandatory housing reporting requirements to provide
that housing policies lead to measurable outcomes.
additional granularity and oversight.
This model fosters stronger state-local partnerships,
Beyond tracking progress, California and Oregon have aligning both levels of government to meet the
set up housing accountability offices to help local pressing housing needs across the state.
Example: California’s Housing
Elements Annual Progress
Report Data Dashboard
California’s APR dashboard
provides a robust example of
how well-organized, granular
data tools can improve housing
reporting requirements. Cascadia
could improve on this tool by
making the tools more visually
intuitive.
https://www.hcd.ca.gov/planning-and-community-development/housing-element-implementation-and-apr-dashboard
28
--- PAGE 29 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Build, Baby, Build: Unlocking
1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
F illing Cascadia’s projected housing gap of roughly
1 million units over the next 20 years will require
an integrated strategy that brings together multiple
solutions to unlock developable land, streamline
permitting, improve the economics of housing
development, and support adoption of innovative
technology. We need to start with a bold, public
commitment to prioritize for affordable and workforce
housing and break down barriers to development.
To realize this commitment, we recommend a
comprehensive, statewide or provincial approach that
includes:
LAND: Rezoning underutilized and vacant
commercial areas such as parking lots, office
parks, strip malls, and big box retail, which are
best prepared to absorb density and typically
have good transit connectivity
Across the region, idle commercially zoned parcels—
overbuilt in today’s era of e-commerce—presents our
greatest opportunity for unlocking developable land PERMITTING: Prioritizing affordable and
for new housing. These corridors, consisting primarily workforce housing development and creating
of properties such as parking lots, strip malls, and a fast-track permitting process for projects that
outdated office parks, can be transformed into lively, meet affordability criteria, such as by exempting
mixed-income, mixed-use boulevards, with preexisting projects from certain discretionary review
connectivity to transit, jobs, and amenities. processes, creating a by-right or ministerial review
process, or developing a catalog of preapproved
ECONOMICS: Addressing the challenging cost
plans that can be automatically approved
structure of workforce housing development
using creative financing mechanisms, such as By pairing zoning with streamlined building and
bonds, and incentives such as the reduction affordability guidelines and fast-track land use
of parking minimums and time-limited tax permitting process, jurisdictions can accelerate housing
exemptions production on underutilized parcels and reduce costly
bottlenecks and discretionary reviews in the process. A
This comprehensive solution would need strong
by-right or a ministerial approval process can fast-track
public-private partnerships to provide low-cost capital
land-use permits, allowing developers to avoid costly
for these projects, ensuring developers have the
delays and NIMBY opposition accelerating the time it
financial tools needed to succeed. Taxable bonds, tax
takes to break ground on new housing. Jurisdictions
exemptions, or direct government support, as well
could also expand the use of preapproved building
as partnerships with private firms, could help fund
plans or creating a self-certification program for
projects, particularly in high-demand urban areas.
qualified architects and developers.
Incentives, such as density bonuses, reducing
INNOVATION: Supporting innovation and
parking minimums, waiving impact fees, and offering
adoption of technology solutions and novel
time-limited tax exemptions, can further improve
construction methods and materials, which
the economics of redevelopment, making housing
create opportunities to lower costs and increase
production a more viable endeavor for developers.
timeliness of development projects
29
--- PAGE 30 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes (cont’d)
F inally, support for technology that can provide each of the parcels considered developable, the land
additional capacity for local governments (e.g., in is worth more than the commercial buildings sitting on
the form of software to support permitting processes the parcels, indicating that even with some time-limited
and customer service) and help reduce costs of tax exemptions, property tax revenue would increase
development while reducing construction time can after redevelopment. Together, these strategies could
improve the feasibility of new development pursued significantly increase the housing supply in Cascadia
under this strategy. while maintaining affordability and creating vibrant
communities.
Cascadia has the unique opportunity to integrate these
solutions and build on innovative policies implemented This requires a united public-private partnership,
elsewhere, such as commercial corridor rezoning bold action from every level of government, and
undertaken in California. Throughout Cascadia, roughly collaboration across sectors. The stakes couldn’t be
1.4 million units are likely to be developed via this higher, and the urgency for action is critical. Only by
comprehensive strategy, which is built on a foundation working together and implementing these solutions
of commercial corridor rezoning but—critically— as a cohesive strategy can we close the housing
incorporates opportunities to increase the timeliness supply gap and secure Cascadia’s future growth and
of permit approvals and improve the economic viability prosperity.
of workforce housing development for developers. For
30
--- PAGE 31 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
CASE STUDY
California’s AB 2011 – The Affordable Housing
and High Road Jobs Act29
In 2022, California enacted Assembly Bill 2011 (AB 2011), the Affordable Housing and High
Road Jobs Act, a pivotal and comprehensive approach aimed at addressing the state’s critical
housing shortage. AB 2011 was designed to unlock underutilized commercial land for housing
development, streamline the approval process for projects, and ensure that new developments
meet both affordability and labor standards.
The Challenge
Like Cascadia, California faces a severe housing deficit, with a current shortage of hundreds
of thousands of homes.30 High development costs, restrictive zoning laws, and lengthy
approval processes have slowed housing production. As a result, valuable land in commercial
corridors often sits idle while housing shortages worsen, particularly for affordable units.
The Solution
AB 2011 provides a clear pathway to transform underused commercial land into affordable
housing. The law allows for by-right development of housing projects on land zoned for
commercial uses, such as retail spaces and parking lots, which have historically been off-
limits for residential construction. By bypassing discretionary reviews—including limiting
challenges under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)—AB 2011 cuts through
the red tape that typically delays projects. This streamlined process sets fixed timelines for
land use permit issuance—requiring land use permits issued in 90 days for buildings with
<150 units and 180 days for 150+ unit buildings—ensuring that developers receive swift,
predictable outcomes.
The legislation provides for a range of housing types and densities based on road
infrastructure and includes a provision that projects include no parking minimums. AB 2011
includes affordability requirements for both mixed-income and 100% affordable housing
projects. (Continued on next page)
Timeline of Permit Review AB 2011 Process
# of days 0 30 60 90 120 150 180
Inform of inconsistencies with
qualifying criteria within 60 days
150 units
or less
Processing, Ministerial Review, and Objective
Design Standards Review within 90 days
Inform of inconsistencies with
qualifying criteria within 90 days
More than
150 units
Processing, Ministerial Review, and Objective
Design Standards Review within 180 days
If applicants are not notified of inconsistencies within applicable timeline, then project is deemed compliant with qualifying criteria
31
--- PAGE 32 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
CASE STUDY (cont’d)
California’s AB 2011 – The Affordable Housing
and High Road Jobs Act
The Impact
AB 2011 has the potential to significantly increase housing production across California. By
repurposing commercial land, the legislation is expected to unlock the potential for over
2 million new housing units, including hundreds of thousands of affordable homes. This
repurposed land is often located near transit and job centers, allowing for more sustainable,
transit-oriented developments that reduce car dependency and lower greenhouse gas
emissions.
Example Project
A mixed-use development in South Los Angeles, which combines a Costco store with 800
residential units, was the first project to advance under AB 2011 and highlights its impact.
Located at former site on a 5-acre lot in the Baldwin Hills neighborhood, the project sits less
than a half-mile south of the Expo/La Brea Station, which is served by Los Angeles Metro
Rail’s E Line. The development includes 184 units designated for low-income residents—
households making under $41,610 per year—and the remaining units are dedicated to
nonsubsidized affordable and workforce housing.31 AB 2011’s fast-track ministerial approval
process allowed the development to proceed roughly 30% more quickly through the
entitlement process, with a predictable and appropriate timeline for receiving land use
permits, according to estimates from Costco representatives. The development (artist’s
rendering below) broke ground in September 2024 and will be composed of prefabricated
modular units.
32
--- PAGE 33 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Call to Action
B uild, Baby, Build: Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes
in Cascadia” offers a comprehensive, actionable
path forward to tackle the region’s workforce housing
crisis. However, achieving success requires more than
isolated policies or piecemeal efforts. It demands a
holistic approach and coordinated effort across public,
private, and nonprofit sectors. Government agencies,
developers, investors, housing advocates, and
community groups must align to create the conditions
necessary for substantial housing development.
This starts with bold policy change: commercial
corridor rezoning accompanied by a fast-track
permitting process and thoughtful financial incentives
that will unlock up to 1.4 million new housing units
across our region. A comprehensive, holistic solution
can jumpstart housing production despite challenging
market conditions, and we can continue to work
collaboratively to identify, refine, and implement
creative solutions that unlock additional housing supply.
Public-private partnership is the backbone of
the solution to our affordable housing shortfall.
Collaboration across stakeholders is essential to
mobilizing the necessary resources and expertise
from all sectors—government, private industry,
and nonprofits—working together to scale housing
development across Cascadia. By aligning public
policies and private investment, we can create solutions access to safe and affordable housing, whether they
that not only increase housing supply but also ensure are part of the workforce or facing the challenges of
affordability and long-term viability. Whether through homelessness.
joint ventures in financing, streamlined permitting
In recent years, state, provincial, and local governments
processes, or shared innovation in building techniques,
have made progress through legislative reforms and
public-private partnerships provide the muscle needed
financial investments. However, the housing crisis
to overcome the barriers that have historically slowed
has intensified in the face of rising costs, economic
down housing production.
uncertainty, and a slowdown in development. We
These partnerships foster an environment in which cannot afford to lose momentum. Policymakers must
developers, policymakers, and housing advocates continue to prioritize housing solutions, and the private
approach barriers to increasing housing supply with a sector must play an essential role in delivering the units
unified vision. The roadmap calls for collective action, necessary to meet our ambitious targets.
ensuring that governments create the conditions
The time to act is now. We must unite around this
for success while the private sector delivers on
shared goal, leverage every available resource, and
development at scale, making this a truly collaborative
implement a comprehensive policy solution with
solution to a shared regional challenge.
urgency. Only by working together can we ensure
This roadmap is just one part of a broader strategy to Cascadia remains a place where everyone—regardless
address the region’s housing needs, complementing of income—can find a home and thrive. Let this
ongoing efforts to expand permanent supportive roadmap be our guide as we embark on this critical
housing and homelessness services. These initiatives journey to build the housing infrastructure necessary
must work in tandem to ensure every individual has for a vibrant and inclusive future.
33
--- PAGE 34 ---
BUILD BABY BUILD Unlocking 1.4 Million New Homes in Cascadia
Sources
1. CBC, 2024: https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/chmc-rental-housing-report-2024-1.7100498
2. Includes the housing units necessary to close the current shortfall, accommodate future population growth, and replace units lost
due to demolition.
3. BIV, 2023: https://www.biv.com/news/real-estate/why-its-taking-10-months-issue-building-permit-vancouver-8273487
4. Harvard University Joint Center for Housing Studies: https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/son-2023-cost-burdens-map
Royal Bank of Canada: https://thoughtleadership.rbc.com/wp-content/uploads/Housing-Affordability_0621-final_v2.pdf
5. Willamette Week, 2022: https://www.wweek.com/news/state/2022/06/21/with-mortgage-rates-rising-four-in-five-portlanders-cant-
afford-a-home/
6. National Low Income Housing Coalition, 2024: https://nlihc.org/oor
7. BCG analysis, based on Seattle area development costs.
8. The Center Square, 2023: https://www.thecentersquare.com/national/article_ce383744-36e8-11ee-9104-bbe77bfa9198.html
Willowdale Equity, 2024: https://willowdaleequity.com/blog/cost-to-build-an-apartment-complex/
9. Building Industry Association of Washington, 2024: https://www.biaw.com/research-center/washington-states-housing-
affordability-index/#:~:text=In%20this%20study%2C%20we%20find,afford%20a%20home%20of%20%24425%2C700.
10. CBRE survey data, 2024
11. HDR analysis, 2024
12. Washington State Standard, 2023: https://washingtonstatestandard.com/2023/05/24/state-looks-to-dump-leased-real-estate-as-
remote-work-leaves-offices-empty/
13. National Center for Education Statistics: https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=619
14. Seattle Times, 2024: https://www.seattletimes.com/business/real-estate/seattle-churches-want-to-build-affordable-housing-face-
testing-times/
15. Vancouver Sun, 2019: https://vancouversun.com/business/real-estate/0323-housing-partnerships
16. Center for Geospatial Solutions, 2024: https://cgsearth.org/cgs-who-owns-america-government-land-report
17. Ballard Spahr, 2023: https://www.ballardspahr.com/insights/alerts-and-articles/2023/12/new-inclusionary-housing-mandates-for-
baltimore-city
18. BCG Analysis
19. The Tyee, 2024: https://thetyee.ca/Opinion/2024/02/15/Metro-Vancouver-Development-Charges-Driving-Up-Housing-Costs/
20. National Association of Home Builders and National Multifamily Housing Council, 2018: https://www.nmhc.org/
contentassets/60365effa073432a8a168619e0f30895/nmhc-nahb-cost-of-regulations.pdf
21. BAE Urban Economics, 2024: https://www.portland.gov/phb/documents/residential-development-cost-study-2024/download
22. Fraser Institute, 2016: https://www.fraserinstitute.org/sites/default/files/impact-of-land-use-regulation-on-housing-supply-in-
canada.pdf
23. Terner Center, 2023: https://ternercenter.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Terner-Center-SB-35-Paper-August-2023-
Final.pdf
24. The Urbanist, 2024: https://www.theurbanist.org/2024/09/06/downtown-design-review-moratorium-gets-mixed-reception-from-
seattle-council/
25. City of Phoenix, 2024: https://www.phoenix.gov/pdd/self-certification-program
26. ACT Research, 2024: https://atcresearch.co/guest-blog/how-executive-directive-1-ed1-is-shaping-las-future/
27. LA Department of City Planning, 2024: https://planning.lacity.gov/plndoc/Staff_Reports/2023/11-16-2023/CPC_2023_5273_
Commission_Packet_11.16.23.pdf
28. The Urbanist, 2023: https://www.theurbanist.org/2023/04/14/explainer-what-is-a-builders-remedy/
29. Association of Bay Area Governments, 2023: https://abag.ca.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2023-07/AB-2011-SB-6-Summary-
Key-Details-7.28.2023.pdf
30. California Construction News, 2023: https://www.californiaconstructionnews.com/2023/10/06/3-5-million-new-homes-needed-to-
end-shortage-by-2025-california-yimby/
31. CBS News, 2024: https://www.cbsnews.com/losangeles/news/a-mixed-use-costco-low-income-housing-development-breaks-
ground-in-south-la/
34
--- PAGE 35 ---
ConnectCascadia.com