
--- PAGE 1 ---
A GRAND BOULEVARD
HOUSING SOLUTION
FOR CASCADIA
BY PETER CALTHORPE
AND EPS
--- PAGE 2 ---
Fig1. Grand Boulevard Redevelopment
EXECUTIVE The housing crisis across the United States has complex roots and causes but
similar manifestations in most communities—lack of affordability for working and
SUMMARY
low-income populations. A large portion of the long-term affordability challenge
is caused by low rates of housing production and the stagnant working-class
incomes that have been building for decades. These long term trends along with
the rising construction and finance costs following Covid creates higher costs in
every dimension of the production process. According to the Boston Consulting
Group the short fall over the next 20 years in the Pacific Northwest could total
400,000du in Washington state, 200,000du in Oregon and 300,000du in
British Columbia.
Many public strategies to mitigate the housing crisis have been proposed and
tested, including various forms of subsidies, reduced friction to entitlements,
and re zoning existing plans to allow more housing and density. Along with the
housing needs come complimentary challenges of mobility and climate change
adaptation. The comprehensive solution examined here is to focus higher density
mixed use development along underutilized strip commercial arterials with the
set of Grand Boulevards Polices (GBP) listed below.
While there is no easy solution or quick fix, Grand Boulevards can be a key
strategy along with policies to provide additional financing support, tax
incentives, and reducing other barriers to development. All strategies involve
public private partnerships as Grand Boulevards will depend on private
sector investment and development catalyzed by public sector entitlement
streamlining and reduced design regulation.
02
--- PAGE 3 ---
A Grand Boulevard Housing Solution for Cascadia
Fig2. Existing Typical Underutilized Strip Commercial in Cascadia Corridor
Our study recommendation is an approach not unlike Seattle, and Vancouver BC) across the Northwestern
the recently adopted AB2011 in California. By upzoning continental corridor of ‘Cascadia’. It also complements
undervalued strip commercial lands, mixed-income housing Washington’s ongoing I-5 corridor study with a potential
would be integrated in locations close to existing services land use scenario of largely infill higher density housing.
and jobs, away from climate hazard zones, and along
Using UrbanFootprint, a sophisticated geographic mapping
corridors that could accommodate new transit technologies.
and land use analysis tool, all commercial nonresidential
This strategy would involve policies combining:
land fronting 4 to 6 lane arterials were identified and
• ‘As of Right’ zoning that allows a range of mixed cataloged. The study identified over 42,000 acres of
income, mixed use housing developments proportional qualifying land along 2,000 miles of existing arterials
to size of road and proximity to existing transit within the 285-mile study area from southern Portland to
• ‘Form Based Codes’ that establish appropriate Vancouver BC. Based on buildings shaped by a Form Based
building massing and height without over regulating Code ranging from 3 to 6 stories of mixed-use, mixed
housing diversity income housing, these lands could ultimately produce over
• Eliminating existing parking standards allowing 4.6 million units of housing over the long term.
varied market driven parking ratios and significant
Of course, not all the land would redevelop as many existing
construction cost savings
commercial projects economically stable and market
• Focus on Workforce rental housing in the 80%-120%
forces may not support redevelopment. To approximate
AMI range, combined with an inclusionary ratio of
which lands were more likely to redevelop over the next
affordable housing below 80% AMI.
20 years, a simple metric of assessed ‘building to land
• Along with this rezoning, streamlining and fast-tracking
value’ ratio of less than one (i.e. land was more valuable
entitlements for new housing, tax incentives and
than the buildings on it) was used to identify probable
subsidized financing can be applied where needed.
redevelopable lands and their housing capacity. This resulted
This study analyzes the location, capacity, and impacts of in approximately 20%-30% of the qualifying parcels or
such a set of policies in three Metropolitan areas (Portland, over 1.4 million units of potential redevelopment.
03
--- PAGE 4 ---
Fig3. Grand Boulevard with Mixed-Income and Mixed-Use Workforce Housing
KEY FINDINGS
The Study's Polices could result in: • Such large-scale redevelopment of underperforming
strip commercial land could produce significantly higher
• Over 42,000 ac of infill parcels entitled for mixed-use
property values and therefore a tax potential up to 37x
mixed-income housing. Of this approximately 13,000
current rates based on increased density and increased
ac are potentially ‘redevelopable’ based on a low ratio of
value per sf.
current assessed building to land value.
• Denser development located along arterial corridors
• These redevelopable parcels could produce over
enhances the viability of higher levels of transit service.
1.4 million units, of which hundreds of thousand units
Bus Rapid Transit could fit on the 240 miles of wide
could be required inclusionary affordable housing
6 lane arterials. In addition, bikeway, landscaping and
depending on positive local economic conditions for
sidewalk enhancement are possible along the 1,700
financing and construction costs.
miles of 4 lane facilities.
• While current marketplace development costs and
• The redevelopment parcels naturally avoid Climate
rents produce differing individual project proforma
Hazzard zones of flooding and fire as the arterials
results for each county and city, Grand Boulevards will
and infill strip commercial parcels are located largely
improve market feasibility significantly in all cases.
on high ground in developed areas not adjacent to
• A combination of reduced entitlement delays, simplified
forest lands.
zoning regulations and reduced parking costs could
• The environmental and economic consequences
result in an average of $90,000 of savings per unit.
of Grand Boulevards are positive when a new unit
• The Grand Boulevards could produce up to around
is compared to the average exiting housing in
670k new units in Seattle region, 400k units in Portland
the area.
area and around 370k units in Metro Vancouver area in
British Columbia*.
04 * Due to data constriants, the capacity of Metro Vancouver is a high-level estimate
--- PAGE 5 ---
A Grand Boulevard Housing Solution for Cascadia
Fig4. Key Numbers for the Cascadia Corridor
Fig5. New Housing Units Potential in Key study Areas
05
--- PAGE 6 ---
Fig6. A Variety of Mixed-Use Workforce Housing Are Possible
WORKFORCE AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING • Reduced Transportation Costs – by locating housing
AT SCALE near jobs, services, and transit in developed areas
The housing needs of the Cascadia super region • Increased Bonding Capacity – by increasing property
are significant in all categories of housing types but values and therefore taxes as under-valued strip
particularly for struggling working households (80-120 commercial land is converted to more and higher
AMI) and low-income populations. The Grand Boulevards valued development
focuses on these two categories of needs with several
The deficit in housing production naturally drives up cost
simultaneous strategies:
and availability. Stabilizing rents and well-located housing
• Supply/Demand Market Forces – by increasing opportunities dependent on achieving a balance of supply
development sites and density, housing supply can rise and demand. In fact, as housing scarcity increases rents
to match the scale of demand are once affordable older housing stock becomes less
• Entitlement Reform – by reducing time, risk and affordable to lower income households. This ultimately
litigation costs through ‘as of right’ re-zoning becomes a factor reinforcing homelessness.
• Market Flexibility – by allowing producers to
Grand Boulevards provides three things to mitigate these
adjust housing type and construction to meet
issues. First, the quantity of housing and its potential density
real needs though a ‘form-based code’ and no
is at scale with the housing needs. Second, a vast inventory
parking requirements
of sites is distributed close to existing communities which
• Inclusionary Housing – by including a certain portion
are job rich and provide the kinds of services needed for
of affordable housing at max 80% AMI integrated with
workforce housing populations. With nearly 42,000 acres
market-based workforce housing
of lands and 32,000 parcels rezoned, the marketplace can
• Reduced Financing and Soft costs – by cutting
find the right location and reduced costs for a board range of
permitting, environmental and entitlement process
housing needs.
time, fees, and documents
06
--- PAGE 7 ---
A Grand Boulevard Housing Solution for Cascadia
Third, the streamlined permit process can save money The Grand Boulevards naturally locates housing near jobs,
and time intrinsically reducing costs and rent levels by services, in potentially transit rich and walkable areas.
reinforcing the supply/demand forces. Studies by BCG This intrinsically reduces auto use when compared to
have approximated that entitlement cost savings can be up average suburban household travel behavior. It also creates
to $48k per unit. In addition, reduced parking requirements the opportunity to build new transit lines where housing
can save up to $50k per stall in structured parking density will co-evolve, and ridership will grow. Walkable
facilities. Combining these with natural market forces and local commercial destinations, bikeways and BRT are all
other potential subsidies such as tax abatement or finance possible along higher density corridors.
insurance can further reduce the total cost to consumers.
Currently construction and development costs are
Finally, housing location as well as cost and supply are at an all-time high and as a result we build less new
critical to solving the housing crisis. If housing is not close housing. This leads not only to larger housing deficits
to job centers and services, household commute costs can it also depresses demand for construction materials
offset savings in rents. Many lower income working people and an adequate labor force, which leads in a viscous
cannot afford to live closed to or within the communities cycle to further erosion of supply chains and contractor
they serve and are forced to longer and longer commutes. compacities. This then fuels a cycle of higher costs and
This then significantly increases the cost of living as gas, less construction.
auto ownership, maintenance, insurance and parking costs
Rezoning and entitlement streamlining will help, but more
can push transportation costs over 15% of household
support may be needed to jump start production in many
income. In addition, regional road congestion, air quality
areas. This may involve other policies such as temporary
impacts, and greenhouse gas emissions all climb as long
tax abatement, finance subsidies, and impact fee
commutes expand. Finally, quality of life, health and
reductions. Each region is different and will need a different
time with family or friends are eroded in proportion to
mix of policies. In sum, many factors add up to accelerating
long commutes.
production of needed workforce and affordable housing.
With Grand Boulevards, market forces can combine with
supportive regulations and zoning to produce housing
and mobility at the scale and in the locations we need
the most.
07
--- PAGE 8 ---
METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS The approach to identifying which parcels were most likely
The Project as sponsored by Challenge Seattle in its role to redevelop was based on local Assessors Parcel land
as Co-Chair of the Cascadia Innovation Corridor. The work and building values used for tax purposes. The assumption
was conducted by HDR-Calthorpe with support from EPS. was that if the building value was lower than land value
The goal was to understand the housing potential and the site would potentially redevelop. This criterion
probable consequences of adopting a series of “Grand Blvd general identifies parcels that are underdeveloped and/or
Policies’ not unlike the recently adopted AB2011 legislation undervalued and therefore likely to redevelop if the zoning
in California. This legislation provided ‘as of Right’ rezoning were enhanced, streamlined, and the economic conditions
for strip commercial lands fronting major and minor for housing were favorable.
arterials throughout the state of California. This study
Once the qualifying and redevelopable parcels were identified
considers the three major metropolitan areas of Portland
a ‘Form Based Code’ development envelop was applied to
OR, Seattle WA and Vancouver BC.
each parcel to determine the probable development density.
The Project methodology using UrbanFootprint software These envelop varied by parcel size, adjacent arterial width,
involved mapping and qualifying parcels, assessing their and proximity to transit according to the following.
ultimate development potential, approximately which
• A minimum of 30 du/ac is required for all parcels
parcels were likely to redevelop, and applying a form-
• No parking minimums apply
based code development density to provide assessments
• The following height standards relate to location:
of potential new housing production over time. In
° 4+ lane – 35’ in height
addition, sample corridors were identified and studied,
° 6+ lane – 50’ in height
potential arterial road enhancements were diagramed,
° TOD – 75’ in height
and assessments of comparative average housing
• The following setback standards are universal:
environmental and economic impacts were made.
° Front Built to Zone – 80% of Façade at 0-10'
The parcels identified by UrbanFootprint for the study ° Rear Setback– 5' for each floor
was based on standards used in AB2011. These qualifying a. Side Setback – 0’
parcels met the following criteria:
Within each of these envelops a standard development
• Must front a major or minor aerial roadway of with a building type was assumed. An approximate density for
Right of Way between 70’ -150’ each of the development types were applied to the parcels
• The parcel can be no larger than 20ac to result in the potential housing production.
• The parcel must be surrounded by existing Urban
development on 75% of its permitter
• The parcel may not be located in a Climate Change
Hazard zone
08
--- PAGE 9 ---
A Grand Boulevard Housing Solution for Cascadia
Fig7. Diverse Housing Types Suitable for Varies Locations
09
--- PAGE 10 ---
TRANSIT POTENTIAL AND INTEGRATION new BRT lines intersecting with and feeding riders to the
Too often rail transit, light or heavy, is too expensive to existing regional trunk line transit systems. In some cases,
span the needs of America’s decentralized metropolitan the corridors already have some transit and can certainly
regions. Bus service, while needed as a last resort for be enhanced as housing density grows. On smaller
many, is too slow to be attractive to drivers. If regional arterials, street enhancements such as wider sidewalks
transit networks are scarce, slow, and expensive, then and bike lanes are possible. In all cases these ribbons of
they have little chance of moving people away from auto housing can connect to and reinforce existing regional
trips. On Grand Boulevards, the next generation of transit transit systems by walking, biking or busways.
could emerge to complement focused density and higher
Several of these corridors were selected and investigated
levels of activity. Upgrading from traditional bus serve
in greater detail. The result show feasibility of Grand
to exclusive Bus Rapid Transit lanes (BRT) could create
Boulevards as applied in real places and corridors. Each
an affordable and ubiquitous network of transit along
corridor is unique, but all demonstrate the capacity
corridors with enhanced density and walkability.
of the policy to produce housing at scale in locations
In each of the regions studied an overlay of Grand which are embedded in existing communitas and can be
Boulevard corridors reveals the potential integration of transit served.
Fig8. Illustration of Rapid Transit System Integrated within Grand Boulevard
10
--- PAGE 11 ---
A Grand Boulevard Housing Solution for Cascadia
Fig9. Sample of Key Corridors in North Seattle Area
Fig10. Current Low Density Strip Commercials on the Key Corridor
11
--- PAGE 12 ---
Fig11. Estimated Assessed Value per Acre Increase on Identified Parcels Before and After
ENVIRONMENTAL AND ECONOMIC METRICS
Dense infill housing is not only naturally more affordable,
but also environmentally responsible in many ways.
Compared to traditional suburban development, it
consumes less land, water, energy and materials while
it produces less auto use, fewer carbon emissions,
and costs less to operate. Using the UrbanFootprint
software comparison of a hypothetical apartment on a
Grand Boulevard in King County was compared to an
‘average’ house in the same county. Using its empirically
based analysis tool a range of metrics were assessed for
savings and costs. In all cases the infill housing produced
better outcomes.
In addition to these encouraging environmental outcomes,
Fig12. Environmental Benefits of Grand Boulevard Households
Grand Boulevard infill housing has significant positive fiscal
impacts for cities, counties and the state. Redevelopment
naturally increases property values both by adding density
and in the case of housing generating on average a higher approximately $220 billion additional land values and
per square foot value. Comparing current parcel values proportional additional tax revenue on a redevelopment
by county for the redevelopment sites in the two primary land area of around 6,500 acres. In the Portland region it
metro regions, the property value would increase around would produce about $110 billion on a land area of 4,000
30 to 40 times on a per acre basis. If all the parcels were acres. This additional tax base and revenue could be
redeveloped in the Seattle region, that would produce used to underwrite bonds for corridor improvements for
12
--- PAGE 13 ---
A Grand Boulevard Housing Solution for Cascadia
Fig13. Walkable Streets Fronting Ground Floor Retail
pedestrian, bike and transit, upgraded water utilities, offset Increasing property values for mixed-use infill are potential
additional local service costs, additional parklands, schools boon to the fiscal health cities and counties. A study by
and even to underwrite additional affordable housing. EPS points out that in California residential property taxes
contribute on average 45 percent of general fund revenues
Since the Grand Boulevard policy allows ground floor
to cities, approximately 2.5 times the contribution of sales
retail and commercial in any project, the market demand
tax revenues. Their analysis finds that the housing enabled
for services in an area with the increasing population
by AB 2011 (California’s Grand Boulevard legislation)
generated by new housing could be incorporated into the
could have assessed values 20 times greater than existing
redevelopment. Certainly, some existing older low value
commercial properties. Moreover, these tax increments
retail and services may be displaced, but the new sales
can underwrite increased municipal bonds to pay for
tax and property tax revenue will exceed those losses by
even more affordable housing, mobility improvements,
the ratios listed above. The existing parcels with stronger
expanded parks, and local services—thus multiplying the
retail, restaurants, and services along the corridor typically
impact of the bill.
will not redevelop as they produce higher net operating
incomes and therefore higher land costs for the developer.
These stable businesses, combined with a growing
population and increased household spending will result in
higher tax base and a more vital commercial district.
13
--- PAGE 14 ---
CONCLUSION While piecemeal rezoning of commercial land for housing or rezoning of Single-
Family lots is gaining momentum in some cities and counties, a broad-based
and comprehensive policy such as the Grand Boulevards policies examined
here is perhaps more productive. This study demonstrates that the scale of
lands and potential housing infill is vast and can significantly impact the supply/
demand imbalance currently plaguing the industry. Moreover, the location of
the development is fortuitus located in existing developed areas surrounded by
communities likely to have developed jobs and services nearby. They are located
along corridors intrinsically connected to the larger regional circulation network
and as infill and redevelopment sites will have less environmental impacts than
development on Greenfields. And their density is more cost effective than small-
scale one-off developments or more single-family subdivisions. Finally, the
study shows the regional transportation impacts and greenhouse gas emissions
are reduced.
Implementing the strategy is best at the regional or state level. Many Grand
Boulevard corridors pass through multiple jurisdictions and need standardized
redevelopment policies. In addition, road improvements and upgraded transit
systems need comprehensive planning, financing, and operations. Finally, the
tax increment produced can support Bonds based on the Corridors rather than
individual cities.
There are precedent and ongoing examples of the Grand Boulevard policy
approach. California’s ‘Affordable Housing and High Road Jobs Act’ (Assembly
Bill 2011) is a model for other states struggling with housing deficits, dying
commercial areas, and the environmental costs of sprawl. This recently adopted
legislation allows ‘as of right’ and streamlined environmental reviews for a variety
of mixed income housing on strip commercial land. It requires a range of minimum
densities and maximum heights, along with market-driven parking allocations,
fair labor standards, and mixed-income construction throughout. And it includes
urban design standards that will shape active, safe and livable environments.
A powerful empirical test of the Grand Boulevard policy, the Minneapolis
2040 Plan adopted a range of housing policies including upzoning commercial
corridors, eliminating minimum parking requirements, and allowing Duplex and
Triplex development on Single-Family lots. From 2017 to 2022 nearly 21,000
new units were permitted in the city. A recent PEW study of the impacts
highlights some significant outcomes. It found that the vast majority (87%)
of the total new units were larger scale corridor development of over 20 units
14
--- PAGE 15 ---
A Grand Boulevard Housing Solution for Cascadia
Fig14. Minneapolis Study
while the Single Family Lot redevelop represented only 1%. relief and entitlement streamlining can provide housing
They found that when compared to the state averages, the that is more affordable to the environment, to working
city's housing stock grew by 12% vs 4% state average, that households and to cities. The redevelopable land area is
homelessness dropped by 20% vs an increase of 14% in large enough to meet the housing deficit of the region and
the state, and most significantly the change in average rent more. While the aging strip comercial across America is
stayed well below inflation in the city at 1% vs 14% for the underutilized and undervalued, but it is an opportunity to
state. Clearly the supply/demand crisis was mitigated by solve our most critical housing and transportation crisis. This
the corridor policy. study demonstrates that we can transform these parking
lots, vacant or nearly empty strip malls of our communities
In conclusion, this study finds for the Cascadia Corridor, a
into thriving, living assets that supply workforce and
Grand Boulevard policy of infill, form-based codes, parking
affordable housing at scale.
Fig15. Illustration of Grand Boulevard in Seattle
15
--- PAGE 16 ---
Peter A. Calthorpe
peter.calthorpe@hdrinc.com
hdrinc.com
We practice increased use of sustainable
materials and reduction of material use.
© 2024 HDR, all rights reserved.